---
layout: post
title: Why I set Goals as a Software Developer
---

I’m sure every single person has had to deal with this at their jobs, especially for those in blue collared jobs. Everyone leaves it until the last minute and it’s one of those things that you just do not put a lot of focus or effort towards until the deadline.

Hell, even if the deadline is the next day, you probably do not put a lot of effort into it. I’m talking about setting your professional goals for the year, you know, that thing that you have to do every year for your performance review. For a lot of people, the performance review means a lot. It’s the difference between getting a promotion versus staying in the same boring old position for at least one more year. It’s also the difference between getting a nice 10–15% raise versus a typical 2–3% raise due to cost of living (aka. Inflation).
I used to hate doing it while working at my first job and I thought it was completely useless. It was only until after my third year of working, I realized that you should actually put time and effort into goal setting for the year. The biggest reason why I realized was because of the potential raises that you could get if you meet or even exceed your goals for the year. It’s always nice to get money and it’s even better to get more money. That reason alone was enough for me to actually focus more on goal setting. What I realized though after I put more effort into setting my goals was that another reason to actually do it is actually to force/motivate yourself to become a better software developer.


If you don’t set your goals, you won’t really care that much about becoming a better developer or you won’t care as much about learning a new technology or new concept. In the end, you become dull and even though you gain a lot of experience through work, you pretty much gain experience in only one specific aspect of your job (whether or not it’s being an expert in the back-end, being an expert in a specific language, or even being an expert at a specific process in your current job) and unfortunately with the ever changing landscape of the technology industry, you pretty much become unemployable because you don’t have the specific skills needed to do another job. You have to think, what happens if you get laid off or fired and what if the specific technology you are good with isn’t that wide spread or there isn’t a market for it anymore. Just look at what happened to COBOL and the mainframe. You have to be able to adapt to the rapid change in the technology industry and setting goals will be very helpful towards that. Not only will you will become more marketable as a potential employee if you’re looking for a new job, but you also become more well rounded as a software developer. That is the most important thing that I realized while I was setting my yearly goals. It wasn’t specifically for trying to get a promotion and raise but it was also to develop my skills and become a better developer overall.


It all depends on you, yourself. Some software developers might want to get into management, so they should set their goals more towards becoming a people friendly person, increasing their emotional intelligence, learning to navigate the political office game, and learning and taking courses on management. For me specifically though, I don’t care for becoming a manager — I prefer to stay as a software developer. I know that the landscape is always changing so when I set my goals for the year (sometimes I set them semi-annually), I actually set a goal to learn a new type of concept, or a new technology. For example, a goal I set for this year (2017) was to learn more about the full stack and what you need to do to become a full stack developer. I started off learning about the MEAN stack because it was all the rage in the past two years (it may not be anymore :S). Through there though, I learned about developing REST APIs, I learned about object relational modelling, I learned about NOSQL, I learned about the things you need to take into account when developing a dynamic website or even a website that users need to interact with (not those basic static websites that you can create in HTML and CSS). I’ve learned so much about new concepts and more importantly how different technologies are but at the same time seeing how the same concepts can be used in new types of solutions. If I didn’t set goals for learning new technologies/concepts, then I would still be at my old job doing core Java development. If I stayed my path, I probably would be a senior developer by now or close to being a senior developer but only good at Java (not even Enterprise Java, MVC, Struts, or Spring). I’ve looked recently at Java jobs. Everyone who wants a Java developer wants a developer who is good at core Java, Enterprise Java, Spring, and JSP/JSF.


My goal setting has taught me quite a bit because I set a goal to learn a new concept or technology and through that I can say I know how it works, I become more marketable because I have another skill/technology under my belt (at least on a theoretical and prototypical level, not at a professional level), and I become a better software developer overall. I can also tell you that because I set these goals to learn new technologies and to become a better developer overall, the new things that I have learned and done have saved my ass when it came to technical questions in interviews. I could not believe how much they have saved my ass when an interviewer asks me a question regarding a specific technical concept, a question I would not have been able to answer if I did not set goals for that year.


It helps to set a couple of goals each year because they definitely help in the long run. You may not see it at first but it’s a long process and you should never expect to see results after putting in work for a day. You will start seeing results after you keep doing it again, and again, and again.


    - Andrew